The ATP-binding cassette transporter OsABCG15 is required for anther development and pollen fertility in rice	2013	J Integr Plant Biol	State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical Agro-bioresources, College of Life Sciences, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, China.	Plant male reproductive development is a complex biological process, but the underlying mechanism is not well understood. Here, we characterized a rice (Oryza sativa L.) male sterile mutant. Based on map-based cloning and sequence analysis, we identified a 1,459-bp deletion in an adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-binding cassette (ABC) transporter gene, OsABCG15, causing abnormal anthers and male sterility. Therefore, we named this mutant osabcg15. Expression analysis showed that OsABCG15 is expressed specifically in developmental anthers from stage 8 (meiosis II stage) to stage 10 (late microspore stage). Two genes CYP704B2 and WDA1, involved in the biosynthesis of very-long-chain fatty acids for the establishment of the anther cuticle and pollen exine, were downregulated in osabcg15 mutant, suggesting that OsABCG15 may play a key function in the processes related to sporopollenin biosynthesis or sporopollenin transfer from tapetal cells to anther locules. Consistently, histological analysis showed that osabcg15 mutants developed obvious abnormality in postmeiotic tapetum degeneration, leading to rapid degredation of young microspores. The results suggest that OsABCG15 plays a critical role in exine formation and pollen development, similar to the homologous gene of AtABCG26 in Arabidopsis. This work is helpful to understand the regulatory network in rice anther development.	OsABCG15, CYP704B2 ,WDA1
ABCG15 encodes an ABC transporter protein, and is essential for post-meiotic anther and pollen exine development in rice	2013	Plant Cell Physiol	Rice Research Institute of Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu Wenjiang, Sichuan, 611130, PR China.	In flowering plants, anther and pollen development is critical for male reproductive success. The anther cuticle and pollen exine play an essential role, and in many cereals, such as rice, orbicules/ubisch bodies are also thought to be important for pollen development. The formation of the anther cuticle, exine and orbicules is associated with the biosynthesis and transport of wax, cutin and sporopollenin components. Recently, progress has been made in understanding the biosynthesis of sporopollenin and cutin components in Arabidopsis and rice, but less is known about the mechanisms by which they are transported to the sites of deposition. Here, we report that the rice ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter, ABCG15, is essential for post-meiotic anther and pollen development, and is proposed to play a role in the transport of rice anther cuticle and sporopollenin precursors. ABCG15 is highly expressed in the tapetum at the young microspore stage, and the abcg15 mutant exhibits small, white anthers lacking mature pollen, lipidic cuticle, orbicules and pollen exine. Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) analysis of the abcg15 anther cuticle revealed significant reductions in a number of wax components and aliphatic cutin monomers. The expression level of genes involved in lipid metabolism in the abcg15 mutant was significantly different from their levels in the wild type, possibly due to perturbations in the homeostasis of anther lipid metabolism. Our study provides new insights for understanding the molecular mechanism of the formation of the anther cuticle, orbicules and pollen wall, as well as the machinery for lipid metabolism in rice anthers.	OsABCG15
Overexpression of ACL1 (abaxially curled leaf 1) increased Bulliform cells and induced Abaxial curling of leaf blades in rice	2010	Mol Plant	National Key Laboratory of Plant Molecular Genetics, Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200032, China.	Understanding the genetic mechanism underlying rice leaf-shape development is crucial for optimizing rice configuration and achieving high yields; however, little is known about leaf abaxial curling. We isolated a rice transferred DNA (T-DNA) insertion mutant, BY240, which exhibited an abaxial leaf curling phenotype that co-segregated with the inserted T-DNA. The T-DNA was inserted in the promoter of a novel gene, ACL1 (Abaxially Curled Leaf 1), and led to overexpression of this gene in BY240. Overexpression of ACL1 in wild-type rice also resulted in abaxial leaf curling. ACL1 encodes a protein of 116 amino acids with no known conserved functional domains. Overexpression of ACL2, the only homolog of ACL1 in rice, also induced abaxial leaf curling. RT-PCR analysis revealed high expressions of ACLs in leaf sheaths and leaf blades, suggesting a role for these genes in leaf development. In situ hybridization revealed non-tissue-specific expression of the ACLs in the shoot apical meristem, leaf primordium, and young leaf. Histological analysis showed increased number and exaggeration of bulliform cells and expansion of epidermal cells in the leaves of BY240, which caused developmental discoordination of the abaxial and adaxial sides, resulting in abaxially curled leaves. These results revealed an important mechanism in rice leaf development and provided the genetic basis for agricultural improvement.	ACL1,ACL2
A Point Mutation of Adh1 Gene is Involved in the Repression of Coleoptile Elongation under Submergence in Rice	2006	Breeding Science	Laboratory of Plant Molecular Genetics, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo	In higher plants, alcoholic fermentation is required to supply NAD+ to the glycolytic pathway, which is responsible for ATP synthesis under anaerobic conditions. Matsumura et al. (1995) previously isolated the reduced adh activity (rad) mutant in rice, in which elongation of the coleoptile is repressed under submergence. However, the rad gene had not been characterized. In the present study, we observed that, in the coleoptile, the Adh1 mRNA levels were comparable between the rad mutant and the wild type cultivar Kinmaze, while the amount of ADH1 protein was much lower in the rad mutant than in the wild type. Sequencing showed that G106 of the Adh1 gene of Kinmaze was replaced with A in the rad mutant, resulting in an E36K substitution in the deduced amino acid sequence. A genotyping experiment using F2 plants from a cross of the rad mutant with the indica cultivar Kasalath indicated that the point mutation was involved in the repression of coleoptile elongation. Furthermore, since the reduced ADH activity appeared to cause an ATP deficiency, elongation of the coleoptile was repressed in the submerged rad mutant.	Adh1
Molecular characterization of cDNA encoding for adenylate kinase of rice (Oryza sativa L.)	1992	Plant J	Institute of Applied Microbiology, University of Tokyo, Japan.	Two types of genes (Adk-a, and Adk-b) encoding for adenylate kinase (AK, EC 2.7.4.3.) were isolated from the cDNA library constructed from poly(A)+ RNA of rice (Oryza sativa L.). Two cDNAs were heterogeneous at 5' and 3' ends of non-coding sequences and had possible polyadenylation signals. One of the genes, Adk-a, had 1154 bp sequences encoding 241 amino acid residues, while the other type, Adk-b, contained 1085 bp sequences encoding for 243 amino acid residues. Homology between Adk-a and Adk-b was 73.7% in nucleotide sequences, and 90.8% in amino acid level. Two genes showed about 53% homology to bovine mitochondrial adenylate kinase (AK2) at nucleotide and amino acid levels. Concerning the codon usage of rice AK genes, T was abundant at the third position of a codon in the reading frames. In order to examine the enzyme activity of the protein encoded by the rice cDNA, Adk-a was cloned into an expression vector, pUC119, which was introduced into Escherichia coli strain CV2, a temperature-sensitive mutant of adenylate kinase. We found that the transformant carrying the rice Adk-a gene in the sense orientation recovered cell growth at non-permissive high temperature (42 degrees C) and expressed enzyme activities higher than the untransformed CV2 and the transformant possessing Adk-a cDNA in the antisense orientation. These observations suggest that rice Adk-a codes a biologically active enzyme. Furthermore, sucrose was found to regulate the transcription of AK genes in rice cell cultures. Organ related accumulation of mRNA in whole plants was also found.	Adk-a,Adk-b
The ANTHER INDEHISCENCE1 gene encoding a single MYB domain protein is involved in anther development in rice	2004	Plant Physiol	CSIRO Plant Industry, Canberra, Australian Capital Territories 2601, Australia.	Using a two-element iAc/Ds transposon-tagging system, we identified a rice (Oryza sativa L. cv Nipponbare) recessive mutant, anther indehiscence1 (aid1), showing partial to complete spikelet sterility. Spikelets of the aid1 mutant could be classified into three types based on the viability of pollen grains and the extent of anther dehiscence. Type 1 spikelets (approximately 25%) were sterile due to a failure in accumulation of starch in pollen grains. Type 2 spikelets (approximately 55%) had viable pollen grains, but anthers failed to dehisce and/or synchronize with anthesis due to failure in septum degradation and stomium breakage, resulting in sterility. Type 3 spikelets (approximately 20%) had normal fertility. In addition, aid1 mutant plants had fewer tillers and flowered 10 to 15 d later than the wild type. The Ds insertion responsible for the aid1 mutation was mapped within the coding region of the AID1 gene on chromosome 6, which is predicted to encode a novel protein of 426 amino acids with a single MYB domain. The MYB domain of AID1 is closely related to that of the telomere-binding proteins of human, mouse, and Arabidopsis, and of single MYB domain transcriptional regulators in plants such as PcMYB1 and ZmIBP1. AID1 was expressed in both the leaves and panicles of wild-type plants, but not in mutant plants.	AID1
Cloning and characterization of AKR4C14, a rice aldo-keto reductase, from Thai Jasmine rice	2012	Protein J	Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Kasetsart University, Pahonyothin Rd, Bangkok, 10903, Thailand.	Aldo-keto reductase (AKR) is an enzyme superfamily whose members are involved in the metabolism of aldehydes/ketones. The AKR4 subfamily C (AKR4C) is a group of aldo-keto reductases that are found in plants. Some AKR4C(s) in dicot plants are capable of metabolizing reactive aldehydes whereas, such activities have not been reported for AKR4C(s) from monocot species. In this study, we have screened Indica rice genome for genes with significant homology to dicot AKR4C(s) and identified a cluster of putative AKR4C(s) located on the Indica rice chromosome I. The genes including OsI_04426, OsI_04428 and OsI_04429 were successfully cloned and sequenced by qRT-PCR from leaves of Thai Jasmine rice (KDML105). OsI_04428, later named AKR4C14, was chosen for further studies because it shares highest homology to the dicot AKR4C(s). The bacterially expressed recombinant protein of AKR4C14 was successfully produced as a MBP fusion protein and his-tagged protein. The recombinant AKR4C14 were capable of metabolizing sugars and reactive aldehydes i.e. methylglyoxal, a toxic by-product of the glycolysis pathway, glutaraldehyde, and trans-2-hexenal, a natural reactive 2-alkenal. AKR4C14 was highly expressed in green tissues, i.e. leaf sheets and stems, whereas flowers and roots had a significantly lower level of expression. These findings indicated that monocot AKR4C(s) can metabolize reactive aldehydes like the dicot AKR4C(s) and possibly play a role in detoxification mechanism of reactive aldehydes.	AKR4C14|OsI_04428,OsAKR1|OsI_04426,OsI_04429
A novel endosperm transfer cell-containing region-specific gene and its promoter in rice	2011	Plant Mol Biol	Graduate School of Agricultural and Life Sciences, University of Tokyo, Yayoi 1-1-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.	The endosperm of cereal grains is an important resource for both food and feed. It contains three major types of tissue: starchy endosperm, the aleurone layer, and transfer cells. To improve grain quality and quantity using molecular methods, control of transgene expression directed by distinct temporal and spatial promoter activity is necessary. To identify aleurone layer-specific and/or transfer cell-specific promoters in rice, microarray analyses were performed, comparing the aleurone layer containing transfer cells and the other reproductive and vegetative tissues. After confirmation by RT-PCR analysis, we identified two putative aleurone layer and/or transfer cell-specific genes, AL1 and AL2. The promoter regions of these genes and beta-glucuronidase (GUS) fusion constructs were stably transformed into rice. The GUS expression patterns indicated that the AL1 promoter was active exclusively in the dorsal aleurone layer adjacent to the main vascular bundle. In rice, transfer cells are differentiated in this region. Therefore, the promoter of the AL1 gene exhibits transfer cell-containing region-specific activity. The AL1 gene encodes a putative anthranilate N-hydroxycinnamoyl/benzoyltransferase. The promoter of this gene will be useful for enhancing uptake of nutrients from the mother cells and protecting filial seeds from pathogen attack.	AL1
Molecular characterization of a gene for alanine aminotransferase from rice (Oryza sativa)	1999	Plant Mol Biol	Department of Biotechnology, National Institute of Agrobiological Resources, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.	A cDNA clone encoding alanine aminotransferase (AlaAT) has isolated from randomly sequenced clones derived from a cDNA library of maturing rice seeds by comparison to previously identified genes. The deduced amino acid sequence was 88% and 91% homologous to those of the enzymes from barley and broomcorn millet (Panicum miliaceum), respectively. Using this cDNA as a probe, we isolated and sequenced the corresponding genomic clone. Comparison of the sequences of the cDNA and the genomic gene revealed that the coding region of the gene was interrupted by 14 introns 66 to 1547 bp long. Northern and western blotting analyses showed that the gene was expressed at high levels in developing seeds. When the 5'-flanking region between -930 and +85 from the site of initiation of transcription was fused to a reporter gene for beta-glucuronidase (GUS) and then introduced into the rice genome, histochemical staining revealed strong GUS activity in the inner endosperm tissue of developing seeds and weak activity in root tips. Similar tissue-specific expression was also detected by in situ hybridization. These results suggest that AlaAT is involved in nitrogen metabolism during the maturation of rice seed.	AlaAT
Genetic analysis of rice grain quality	1999	TAG Theoretical and Applied Genetics	Institute of Genetics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China	The inheritance of grain quality is more complicated than that of other agronomic traits in cereals due to epistasis, maternal and cytoplasmic effects, and the triploid nature of endosperm. In the present study, an established rice DH population derived from anther culture of an indica/japonica hybrid was used for genetic analysis of rice grain quality. A total of five parameters, amylose content (AC), alkali-spreading score (ASS), gel consistency (GC), percentage of grain with a white core (PGWC) and the square of the white core (SWC), were estimated for the DH lines and the parent varieties. For each parent, the value of each parameter was relatively stable in three locations, Beijing, Hangzhou and Chengdu, while the differences between the parents were significant for all five parameters. AC showed a bimodal distribution, and the distribution of ASS was skewed toward the value of JX17, while the other three parameters displayed continuous distributions among the DH lines with partially transgressive segregations. For AC, a minor and a major gene were found on chromosomes 5 and 6 respectively. The major gene, which should be an allele of wx, explained 91.9% of the total variation. For GC, two QTLs were identified on chromosomes 2 and 7 respectively. For ASS, a minor and a major gene were both located on chromosome 6. The major gene should be the same locus as the alkali degeneration gene (alk). Genetic linkage between alk and wx was found in QTL mapping. For PGWC, two QTLs were located on chromosomes 8 and 12. Only a minor QTL was found for SWC on chromosome 3. The results and the molecular markers presented here may be useful in rice breeding for grain quality improvement.	ALK|SSIIa
OsbZIP58, a basic leucine zipper transcription factor, regulates starch biosynthesis in rice endosperm	2013	J Exp Bot	National Key Laboratory of Plant Molecular Genetics, Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200032, PR China.	Starch composition and the amount in endosperm, both of which contribute dramatically to seed yield, cooking quality, and taste in cereals, are determined by a series of complex biochemical reactions. However, the mechanism regulating starch biosynthesis in cereal seeds is not well understood. This study showed that OsbZIP58, a bZIP transcription factor, is a key transcriptional regulator controlling starch synthesis in rice endosperm. OsbZIP58 was expressed mainly in endosperm during active starch synthesis. osbzip58 null mutants displayed abnormal seed morphology with altered starch accumulation in the white belly region and decreased amounts of total starch and amylose. Moreover, osbzip58 had a higher proportion of short chains and a lower proportion of intermediate chains of amylopectin. Furthermore, OsbZIP58 was shown to bind directly to the promoters of six starch-synthesizing genes, OsAGPL3, Wx, OsSSIIa, SBE1, OsBEIIb, and ISA2, and to regulate their expression. These findings indicate that OsbZIP58 functions as a key regulator of starch synthesis in rice seeds and provide new insights into seed quality control.	ALK|SSIIa,OsBEIIb,OsISA2,RISBZ1|OsbZIP58,BEI|SBE1,Wx
Double repression of soluble starch synthase genes SSIIa and SSIIIa in rice (Oryza sativa L.) uncovers interactive effects on the physicochemical properties of starch	2011	Genome	Institute of Crop Science and the National Key Facility for Crop Gene Resources and Genetic Improvement, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing 100081, China.	Soluble starch synthases (SSs) are major enzymes involved in starch biosynthesis in developing rice (Oryza sativa L.) endosperm. Despite extensive studies of SSs in various plant species including rice, the functional modes of action among multiple SS genes are still not clear. Here, we generated transgenic RNA interference (RNAi) repressed lines for seven of the eight members of the rice SS gene family and studied their effects on starch synthesis and grain formation. Consistent with their expression domains, RNAi repression of genes that encode isozymes SSI, SSIIa, and SSIIIa had strong effects on grain development, whereas no obvious phenotypic changes were observed in transgenic plants with the other SS genes being RNAi repressed, indicating functional redundancies among the genes. To study the potential functional interactions of SS genes, we generated SSIIa/SSIIIa double repression lines whose kernels displayed a chalky kernel appearance and had increased amylose levels, increased pasting temperatures, and decreased viscosities. The double mutation also reduced short (degree of polymerization (DP) 5-6) and long (DP 12-23) amylopectin chain contents in the grain and increased the medium long types (DP 7-11). The nonadditive nature of the double mutation line suggests that SSIIa and SSIIIa interact with each other during starch synthesis. Such interaction may be physical via starch phophorylase as indicated by our pair-wise yeast two-hybrid assays on major starch synthesis enzymes. Collectively, the data showed that SSIIa and SSIIIa play distinctive, but partially overlapping, roles during rice grain starch synthesis. The possibility of extensive redundancy or complementarity among SS isozymes is discussed.	ALK|SSIIa,OsSSIIIa|Flo5
Compensation and interaction between RISBZ1 and RPBF during grain filling in rice	2009	Plant J	Transgenic Crop Research and Development Centre, National Institute of Agrobiological Sciences, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8602, Japan.	The rice (Oryza sativa L.) basic leucine Zipper factor RISBZ1 and rice prolamin box binding factor (RPBF) are transcriptional activators of rice seed storage protein (SSP) genes in vivo. To ascertain the functions of these trans-activators in seed development, knock-down (KD) transgenic rice plants were generated in which the accumulation of RISBZ1 and RPBF was reduced in an endosperm-specific manner by co-suppression (KD-RISBZ1 and KD-RPBF). The accumulation of most SSPs changed little between individual KD mutants and wild-type plants, whereas a double KD mutant (KD-RISBZ1/KD-RPBF) resulted in a significant reduction of most SSP gene expression and accumulation. The reduction of both trans-activators also caused a greater reduction in seed starch accumulation than individual KD mutants. Storage lipids were accumulated at reduced levels in KD-RISBZ1 and KD-RISBZ1/KD-RPBF seeds. KD-RPBF and KD-RISBZ1/KD-RPBF seeds exhibited multi-layered aleurone cells. Gene expression of DEFECTIVE KERNEL1 (OsDEK1), CRINKLY4 (OsCR4) and SUPERNUMERARY ALEURONE LAYER 1 (OsSAL1) rice homologues was decreased in the KD mutants, suggesting that these genes are regulated by RISBZ1 and RPBF. These phenotypes suggest that combinatorial interactions between RISBZ1 and RPBF play an essential role during grain filling. The functional redundancy and compensation between RISBZ1 and RPBF possibly account for weak effects on the SSP levels in single KD mutants, and help maintain various processes during seed development in rice. Physical interaction between RISBZ1 and RPBF may ensure that these processes are carried out properly.	ALK|SSIIa,GluA,GluD,OsAPL2|osagpl2-3,OsAPS2|OsAGPS2b,OsCR4,ADL1|OsDEK1,RAG1,OsSAL1|RHL,RISBZ1|OsbZIP58,RPBF|OsDof3
Association between nonsynonymous mutations of starch synthase IIa and starch quality in rice (Oryza sativa)	2011	New Phytol	Department of Biology, Washington University of St. Louis, Missouri, 63130, USA Present address: Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology Research, University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, 20742, USA. guoqinyu@umd.edu	Starch quality is one of the most important agronomic traits in Asian rice, Oryza sativa. Starch synthase IIa (SsIIa) is a major candidate gene for starch quality variation. Within SsIIa, three nonsynonymous mutations in exon 8 have been shown to affect enzyme activity when expressed in Escherichia coli. To search for the variation in SsIIa that is responsible for starch quality variation in rice, we sequenced the SsIIa exon 8 region and measured starch quality as starch disintegration in alkali for 289 accessions of cultivated rice and 57 accessions of its wild ancestor, Oryza rufipogon. A general linear model and nested clade analysis were used to identify the associations between the three nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and starch quality. Among the three nonsynonymous SNPs, we found strong evidence of association at one nucleotide site ('SNP 3'), corresponding to a Leu/Phe replacement at codon 781. A second SNP, corresponding to a Val/Met replacement at codon 737, could potentially show an association with increased sample sizes. Variation in SsIIa enzyme activity is associated with the cohesiveness of rice grains when cooked, and our findings are consistent with selection for more cohesive grains during the domestication of tropical japonica rice.	ALK|SSIIa
ALK, the key gene for gelatinization temperature, is a modifier gene for gel consistency in rice	2011	J Integr Plant Biol	State Key Laboratory of Rice Biology, China National Rice Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Science, Hangzhou 310006, China.	Gelatinization temperature (GT) is an important parameter in evaluating the cooking and eating quality of rice. Indeed, the phenotype, biochemistry and inheritance of GT have been widely studied in recent times. Previous map-based cloning revealed that GT was controlled by ALK gene, which encodes a putative soluble starch synthase II-3. Complementation vector and RNAi vector were constructed and transformed into Nipponbare mediated by Agrobacterium. Phenotypic and molecular analyses of transgenic lines provided direct evidence for ALK as a key gene for GT. Meanwhile, amylose content, gel consistency and pasting properties were also affected in transgenic lines. Two of four nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms in coding sequence of ALK were identified as essential for GT. Based on the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), two new sets of SNP markers combined with one cleaved amplified polymorphic sequence marker were developed for application in rice quality breeding.	ALK|SSIIa
SNP in starch biosynthesis genes associated with nutritional and functional properties of rice	2012	Sci Rep	Southern Cross Plant Science, Southern Cross University, Lismore, NSW 2480, Australia.	Starch is a major component of human diets. The relative contribution of variation in the genes of starch biosynthesis to the nutritional and functional properties of the rice was evaluated in a rice breeding population. Sequencing 18 genes involved in starch synthesis in a population of 233 rice breeding lines discovered 66 functional SNPs in exonic regions. Five genes, AGPS2b, Isoamylase1, SPHOL, SSIIb and SSIVb showed no polymorphism. Association analysis found 31 of the SNP were associated with differences in pasting and cooking quality properties of the rice lines. Two genes appear to be the major loci controlling traits under human selection in rice, GBSSI (waxy gene) and SSIIa. GBSSI influenced amylose content and retrogradation. Other genes contributing to retrogradation were GPT1, SSI, BEI and SSIIIa. SSIIa explained much of the variation in cooking characteristics. Other genes had relatively small effects.	ALK|SSIIa
Conservation and implications of eukaryote transcriptional regulatory regions across multiple species	2008	BMC Genomics	School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, PR China	Background. Increasing evidence shows that whole genomes of eukaryotes are almost entirely transcribed into both protein coding genes and an enormous number of non-protein-coding RNAs (ncRNAs). Therefore, revealing the underlying regulatory mechanisms of transcripts becomes imperative. However, for a complete understanding of transcriptional regulatory mechanisms, we need to identify the regions in which they are found. We will call these transcriptional regulation regions, or TRRs, which can be considered functional regions containing a cluster of regulatory elements that cooperatively recruit transcriptional factors for binding and then regulating the expression of transcripts. Results. We constructed a hierarchical stochastic language (HSL) model for the identification of core TRRs in yeast based on regulatory cooperation among TRR elements. The HSL model trained based on yeast achieved comparable accuracy in predicting TRRs in other species, e.g., fruit fly, human, and rice, thus demonstrating the conservation of TRRs across species. The HSL model was also used to identify the TRRs of genes, such as p53 or OsALYL1, as well as microRNAs. In addition, the ENCODE regions were examined by HSL, and TRRs were found to pervasively locate in the genomes. Conclusion. Our findings indicate that 1) the HSL model can be used to accurately predict core TRRs of transcripts across species and 2) identified core TRRs by HSL are proper candidates for the further scrutiny of specific regulatory elements and mechanisms. Meanwhile, the regulatory activity taking place in the abundant numbers of ncRNAs might account for the ubiquitous presence of TRRs across the genome. In addition, we also found that the TRRs of protein coding genes and ncRNAs are similar in structure, with the latter being more conserved than the former.	OsALYL1
An-1 encodes a basic helix-loop-helix protein that regulates awn development, grain size, and grain number in rice	2013	Plant Cell	National Center for Gene Research, Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200233, China.	Long awns are important for seed dispersal in wild rice (Oryza rufipogon), but are absent in cultivated rice (Oryza sativa). The genetic mechanism involved in loss-of-awn in cultivated rice remains unknown. We report here the molecular cloning of a major quantitative trait locus, An-1, which regulates long awn formation in O. rufipogon. An-1 encodes a basic helix-loop-helix protein, which regulates cell division. The nearly-isogenic line (NIL-An-1) carrying a wild allele An-1 in the genetic background of the awnless indica Guangluai4 produces long awns and longer grains, but significantly fewer grains per panicle compared with Guangluai4. Transgenic studies confirmed that An-1 positively regulates awn elongation, but negatively regulates grain number per panicle. Genetic variations in the An-1 locus were found to be associated with awn loss in cultivated rice. Population genetic analysis of wild and cultivated rice showed a significant reduction in nucleotide diversity of the An-1 locus in rice cultivars, suggesting that the An-1 locus was a major target for artificial selection. Thus, we propose that awn loss was favored and strongly selected by humans, as genetic variations at the An-1 locus that cause awn loss would increase grain numbers and subsequently improve grain yield in cultivated rice.	An-1
Retrograde regulation of nuclear gene expression in CW-CMS of rice	2007	Plant Mol Biol	Laboratory of Environmental Biotechnology, Graduate School of Agricultural Science, Tohoku University, 1-1 Tsutumidori-Amamiyamachi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 981-8555, Japan.	The CW-cytoplasmic male sterility (CMS) line has the cytoplasm of Oryza rufipogon Griff, and mature pollen is morphologically normal under an optical microscope but lacks the ability to germinate; restorer gene Rf17 has been identified as restoring this ability. The difference between nuclear gene expression in mature anthers was compared for the CW-CMS line, [cms-CW] rf17rf17, and a maintainer line with normal cytoplasm of Oryza sativa L., [normal] rf17rf17. Using a 22-k rice oligoarray we detected 58 genes that were up-regulated more than threefold in the CW-CMS line. Expression in other organs was further investigated for 20 genes using RT-PCR. Five genes, including genes for alternative oxidase, were found to be preferentially expressed in [cms-CW] rf17rf17 but not in [normal] rf17rf17 or [cms-CW] Rf17Rf17. Such [cms-CW] rf17rf17-specific gene expression was only observed in mature anthers but not in leaves, stems, or roots, indicating the presence of anther-specific mitochondrial retrograde regulation of nuclear gene expression, and that Rf17 has a role in restoring the ectopic gene expression. We also used a proteomic approach to discover the retrograde regulated proteins and identified six proteins that were accumulated differently. These results reveal organ-specific induced mitochondrial retrograde pathways affecting nuclear gene expression possibly related to CMS.	OsAOX1c|AOX1c
Unravelling mitochondrial retrograde regulation in the abiotic stress induction of rice ALTERNATIVE OXIDASE 1 genes	2013	Plant Cell Environ	Institute of Rice Research, Anhui Academy of Agricultural Science, Hefei 230031, China.	Mitochondrial retrograde regulation (MRR) is the transduction of mitochondrial signals to mediate nuclear gene expression. It is not clear whether MRR is a common regulation mechanism in plant abiotic stress response. In this study, we analysed the early abiotic stress response of the rice OsAOX1 genes, and the induction of OsAOX1a and OsAOX1b (OsAOX1a/b) was selected as a working model for the stress-induced MRR studies. We found that the induction mediated by the superoxide ion (O2.(-) )-generating chemical methyl viologen was stronger than that of hydrogen peroxide (H2 O2 ). The addition of reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavengers demonstrated that the stress induction was reduced by eliminating O2.(-) . Furthermore, the stress induction did not rely on chloroplast- or cytosol-derived O2.(-) . Next, we generated transgenic plants overexpressing the superoxide dismutase (SOD) gene at different subcellular locations. The results suggest that only the mitochondrial SOD, OsMSD, attenuated the stress induction of OsAOX1a/b specifically. Therefore, our findings demonstrate that abiotic stress initiates the MRR on OsAOX1a/b and that mitochondrial O2.(-) is involved in the process.	OsAOX1c|AOX1c,AOX1a|OsAOX1a,OsAOX1b,OsMSD
AOX1c, a novel rice gene for alternative oxidase; comparison with rice AOX1a and AOX1b	2002	Genes Genet Syst	Laboratory of Plant Molecular Genetics, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo, Japan.	A novel gene for alternative oxidase (AOX) was isolated from rice (Oryza sativa L.) and characterized. The deduced amino acid sequence of the novel AOX gene contains features that are conserved among other AOXs. This AOX gene was designated AOX1c based on a phylogenetic analysis of the AOX genes. Northern hybridization analyses revealed that AOX1c and AOX1a/AOX1b transcripts accumulated differently in various rice organs and rice seedlings under low temperature conditions. AOX1c mRNA was mainly present in young leaves under constant light, mature leaves and panicles after heading, but it was not detected in young etiolated leaves and young roots of seedlings or young panicles. On the other hand, the mRNAs of the rice AOX1a and AOX1b genes were mainly present in young roots and mature leaves. Under low temperature conditions, the steady-state mRNA levels of the rice AOX1a and AOX1b genes clearly increased with time but the rice AOX1c gene was apparently not responsive to low temperature. The rice AOX gene family and differences in their regulation are discussed.	OsAOX1c|AOX1c
The Magnaporthe oryzae effector AvrPiz-t targets the RING E3 ubiquitin ligase APIP6 to suppress pathogen-associated molecular pattern-triggered immunity in rice	2012	Plant Cell	Department of Plant Pathology, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.	Although the functions of a few effector proteins produced by bacterial and oomycete plant pathogens have been elucidated in recent years, information for the vast majority of pathogen effectors is still lacking, particularly for those of plant-pathogenic fungi. Here, we show that the avirulence effector AvrPiz-t from the rice blast fungus Magnaporthe oryzae preferentially accumulates in the specialized structure called the biotrophic interfacial complex and is then translocated into rice (Oryza sativa) cells. Ectopic expression of AvrPiz-t in transgenic rice suppresses the flg22- and chitin-induced generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and enhances susceptibility to M. oryzae, indicating that AvrPiz-t functions to suppress pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP)-triggered immunity in rice. Interaction assays show that AvrPiz-t suppresses the ubiquitin ligase activity of the rice RING E3 ubiquitin ligase APIP6 and that, in return, APIP6 ubiquitinates AvrPiz-t in vitro. Interestingly, agroinfection assays reveal that AvrPiz-t and AvrPiz-t Interacting Protein 6 (APIP6) are both degraded when coexpressed in Nicotiana benthamiana. Silencing of APIP6 in transgenic rice leads to a significant reduction of flg22-induced ROS generation, suppression of defense-related gene expression, and enhanced susceptibility of rice plants to M. oryzae. Taken together, our results reveal a mechanism in which a fungal effector targets the host ubiquitin proteasome system for the suppression of PAMP-triggered immunity in plants.	APIP6
ARAG1, an ABA-responsive DREB gene, plays a role in seed germination and drought tolerance of rice	2010	Ann Bot	Research Center for Molecular & Developmental Biology, Key Laboratory of Photosynthesis & Environmental Molecular Physiology, Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100093, China.	BACKGROUND AND AIMS: DREB proteins are involved mainly in plant responses to abiotic stresses such as cold, drought or high salinity as well as ABA signalling. However, the function of most rice DREB genes and the underlying molecular mechanisms controlling these responses remains elusive. In this study, ARAG1, a rice DREB gene, was functionally analysed. METHODS: Antisense and over-expression constructs of ARAG1 were introduced into rice by an Agrobacterium-mediated method. RT-PCR and western blot were used to detect ARAG1 accumulation in transgenics. PEG and ABA were used to test their response to abiotic stresses. KEY RESULTS: ARAG1 was expressed in inflorescences, roots, immature embryos and germinating seeds, but not in coleoptiles, leaves or mature embryos. Drought stress and ABA treatment increased transcript levels of the gene rapidly. ARAG1 knockdown line was hypersensitive to ABA application during seed germination and seedling growth. However, the line over-expressing ARAG1 behaved similarly to wild type in these circumstances. Knockdown of ARAG1 weakened tolerance of the transgenic seedlings to drought stress, while over-expression of it increased the tolerance slightly. In addition, activity of alpha-amylases was enhanced in germinating seeds of the knockdown and over-expression lines. CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that ARAG1 was involved in the ABA signalling and stress responsive pathways.	ARAG1
'Evidence of an auxin signal pathway, microRNA167-ARF8-GH3, and its response to exogenous auxin in cultured rice cells'	2006	Nucleic Acids Res	Department of Biological Science and the Basic Science Research Institute, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Korea 440-746.	MicroRNA167 (miR167) was shown to cleave auxin responsive factor 8 (ARF8) mRNA in cultured rice cells. MiR167 level was found to be controlled by the presence of auxin in the growth medium. When cells grew in auxin-free medium, miR167 level decreased, resulting in an increase in the level of ARF8 mRNA. Cells growing in the normal growth medium containing auxin showed a reversed trend. It was also shown that expression of OsGH3-2, an rice IAA-conjugating enzyme, was positively regulated by ARF8. Delivery of synthesized miR167 into cells led to decrease of both ARF8 mRNA and OsGH3-2 mRNA. This study provides an evidence in which the exogeneous auxin signal is transduced to OsGH3-2 through miR167 and ARF8 in sequence. This proposed auxin signal transduction pathway, auxin-miR167-ARF8-OsGH3-2, could be, in conjunction with the other microRNA-mediated auxin signals, an important one for responding to exogeneous auxin and for determining the cellular free auxin level which guides appropriate auxin responses.	ARF8,OsGH3-2
Identification of a cis-acting element of ART1, a C2H2-type zinc-finger transcription factor for aluminum tolerance in rice	2011	Plant Physiol	Institute of Plant Science and Resources, Okayama University, Chuo 2-20-1, Kurashiki 710-0046, Japan.	Rice (Oryza sativa) is one of the most aluminum (Al)-tolerant species among small-grain cereals. Recent identification of a transcription factor AL RESISTANCE TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR1 (ART1) revealed that this high Al tolerance in rice is achieved by multiple genes involved in detoxification of Al at different cellular levels. ART1 is a C2H2-type zinc-finger transcription factor and regulates the expression of 31 genes in the downstream. In this study, we attempted to identify a cis-acting element of ART1. We used the promoter region of SENSITIVE TO AL RHIZOTOXICITY1, an Al tolerance gene in the downstream of ART1. With the help of gel-shift assay, we were able to identify the cis-acting element as GGN(T/g/a/C)V(C/A/g)S(C/G). This element was found in the promoter region of 29 genes among 31 ART1-regulated genes. To confirm this cis-acting element in vivo, we transiently introduced this element one or five times tandemly repeated sequence with 35S minimal promoter and green fluorescent protein reporter together with or without ART1 gene in the tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) mesophyll protoplasts. The results showed that the expression of green fluorescent protein reporter responded to ART1 expression. Furthermore, the expression increased with repetition of the cis-acting element. Our results indicate that the five nucleotides identified are the target DNA-binding sequence of ART1.	ART1
An Al-inducible MATE gene is involved in external detoxification of Al in rice	2011	Plant J	Institute of Plant Science and Resources, Okayama University, Chuo 2-20-1, Kurashiki 710-0046, Japan.	A number of plant species, including rice, secretes citrate from roots in response to Al stress. Here we characterized the functions of a gene, OsFRDL4 (Os01g0919100) that belongs to the multidrug and toxic compound extrusion (MATE) family in rice (Oryza sativa). Heterologous expression in Xenopus oocyte showed that the OsFRDL4 protein was able to transport citrate and was activated by Al. The expression level of the OsFRDL4 gene in roots was very low in the absence of Al, but was greatly enhanced by Al after short exposure. Furthermore, the OsFRDL4 expression was regulated by ART1, a C2H2-type zinc finger transcription factor for Al tolerance. Transient expression of OsFRDL4 in onion epidermal cells showed that it localized to the plasma membrane. Immunostaining showed that OsFRDL4 was localized in all cells in the root tip. These expression patterns and cell specificity of localization of OsFRDL4 are different from other MATE members identified previously. Knockout of OsFRDL4 resulted in decreased Al tolerance and decreased citrate secretion compared with the wild-type rice, but did not affect citrate concentration in the xylem sap. Furthermore, there is a positive correlation between OsFRDL4 expression level and the amount of citrate secretion in rice cultivars that are differing in Al tolerance. Taken together, our results show that OsFRDL4 is an Al-induced citrate transporter localized at the plasma membrane of rice root cells and is one of the components of high Al tolerance in rice.	ART1,OsFRDL4
A zinc finger transcription factor ART1 regulates multiple genes implicated in aluminum tolerance in rice	2009	Plant Cell	Research Institute for Bioresources, Okayama University, Kurashiki 710-0046, Japan.	Aluminum (Al) toxicity is the major limiting factor of crop production on acid soils, but some plant species have evolved ways of detoxifying Al. Here, we report a C2H2-type zinc finger transcription factor ART1 (for Al resistance transcription factor 1), which specifically regulates the expression of genes related to Al tolerance in rice (Oryza sativa). ART1 is constitutively expressed in the root, and the expression level is not affected by Al treatment. ART1 is localized in the nucleus of all root cells. A yeast one-hybrid assay showed that ART1 has a transcriptional activation potential and interacts with the promoter region of STAR1, an important factor in rice Al tolerance. Microarray analysis revealed 31 downstream transcripts regulated by ART1, including STAR1 and 2 and a couple of homologs of Al tolerance genes in other plants. Some of these genes were implicated in both internal and external detoxification of Al at different cellular levels. Our findings shed light on comprehensively understanding how plants detoxify aluminum to survive in an acidic environment.	ART1,STAR1,STAR2
Plasma membrane-localized transporter for aluminum in rice	2010	Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A	Institute for Plant Science and Resources, Okayama University, Kurashiki 710-0046, Japan.	Aluminum (Al) is the most abundant metal in the Earth's crust, but its trivalent ionic form is highly toxic to all organisms at low concentrations. How Al enters cells has not been elucidated in any organisms. Herein, we report a transporter, Nrat1 (Nramp aluminum transporter 1), specific for trivalent Al ion in rice. Nrat1 belongs to the Nramp (natural resistance-associated macrophage protein) family, but shares a low similarity with other Nramp members. When expressed in yeast, Nrat1 transports trivalent Al ion, but not other divalent ions, such as manganese, iron, and cadmium, or the Al-citrate complex. Nrat1 is localized at the plasma membranes of all cells of root tips except epidermal cells. Knockout of Nrat1 resulted in decreased Al uptake, increased Al binding to cell wall, and enhanced Al sensitivity, but did not affect the tolerance to other metals. Expression of Nrat1 is up-regulated by Al in the roots and regulated by a C2H2 zinc finger transcription factor (ART1). We therefore concluded that Nrat1 is a plasma membrane-localized transporter for trivalent Al, which is required for a prior step of final Al detoxification through sequestration of Al into vacuoles.	ART1,Nrat1
Disruption of the rice plastid ribosomal protein s20 leads to chloroplast developmental defects and seedling lethality	2013	G3 (Bethesda)	Development Center of Plant Germplasm Resources, College of Life and Environmental Sciences, Shanghai Normal University, Shanghai 200234.	Plastid ribosomal proteins (PRPs) are essential for ribosome biogenesis, plastid protein biosynthesis, chloroplast differentiation, and early chloroplast development. This study identifies the first rice PRP mutant, asl1 (albino seedling lethality1), which exhibits an albino lethal phenotype at the seedling stage. This albino phenotype was associated with altered chlorophyll (Chl) content and chloroplast development. Map-based cloning revealed that ASL1 encodes PRP S20 (PRPS20), which localizes to the chloroplast. ASL1 showed tissue-specific expression, as it was highly expressed in plumule and young seedlings but expressed at much lower levels in other tissues. In addition, ASL1 expression was regulated by light. The transcript levels of nuclear genes for Chl biosynthesis and chloroplast development were strongly affected in asl1 mutants; transcripts of some plastid genes for photosynthesis were undetectable. Our findings indicate that nuclear-encoded PRPS20 plays an important role in chloroplast development in rice.	ASL1
Mutation of the rice ASL2 gene encoding plastid ribosomal protein L21 causes chloroplast developmental defects and seedling death	2014	Plant Biol (Stuttg)	Development Center of Plant Germplasm Resources, College of Life and Environment Sciences, Shanghai Normal University, Shanghai, China.	The plastid ribosome proteins (PRPs) play important roles in plastid protein biosynthesis, chloroplast differentiation and early chloroplast development. However, the specialised functions of individual protein components of the chloroplast ribosome in rice (Oryza sativa) remain unresolved. In this paper, we identified a novel rice PRP mutant named asl2 (Albino seedling lethality 2) exhibiting an albino, seedling death phenotype. In asl2 mutants, the alteration of leaf colour was associated with chlorophyll (Chl) content and abnormal chloroplast development. Through map-based cloning and complementation, the mutated ASL2 gene was isolated and found to encode the chloroplast 50S ribosome protein L21 (RPL21c), a component of the chloroplast ribosome large subunit, which was localised in chloroplasts. ASL2 was expressed at a higher level in the plumule and leaves, implying its tissue-specific expression. Additionally, the expression of ASL2 was regulated by light. The transcript levels of the majority of genes for Chl biosynthesis, photosynthesis and chloroplast development were strongly affected in asl2 mutants. Collectively, the absence of functional ASL2 caused chloroplast developmental defects and seedling death. This report establishes the important role of RPL21c in chloroplast development in rice.	ASL2
Structure, allelic diversity and selection of Asr genes, candidate for drought tolerance, in Oryza sativa L. and wild relatives	2010	Theor Appl Genet	CIRAD, UMR Developpement et Amelioration des Plantes, TA-A 96/03, 34398, Montpellier, France. rphilippe@clermont.inra.fr	Asr (ABA, stress, ripening) genes represent a small gene family potentially involved in drought tolerance in several plant species. To analyze their interest for rice breeding for water-limited environments, this gene family was characterized further. Genomic organization of the gene family reveals six members located on four different chromosomes and with the same exon-intron structure. The maintenance of six members of the Asr gene family, which are the result of combination between tandem duplication and whole genome duplication, and their differential regulation under water stress, involves probably some sub-functionalization. The polymorphism of four members was studied in a worldwide collection of 204 accessions of Oryza sativa L. and 14 accessions of wild relatives (O. rufipogon and O. nivara). The nucleotide diversity of the Asr genes was globally low, but contrasted for the different genes, leading to different shapes of haplotype networks. Statistical tests for neutrality were used and compared to their distribution in a set of 111 reference genes spread across the genome, derived from another published study. Asr3 diversity exhibited a pattern concordant with a balancing selection at the species level and with a directional selection in the tropical japonica sub-group. This study provides a thorough description of the organization of the Asr family, and the nucleotide and haplotype diversity of four Asr in Oryza sativa species. Asr3 stood out as the best potential candidate. The polymorphism detected here represents a first step towards an association study between genetic polymorphisms of this gene family and variation in drought tolerance traits.	Asr1,Asr2,Asr4,Asr6,ASR5|OsAsr1,Asr3|OsASR3
Involvement of ASR genes in aluminium tolerance mechanisms in rice	2013	Plant Cell Environ	Programa de Pos-Graduacao em Genetica e Biologia Molecular Programa de Pos-Graduacao em Biologia Celular e Molecular, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil.	Among cereal crops, rice is considered the most tolerant to aluminium (Al). However, variability among rice genotypes leads to remarkable differences in the degree of Al tolerance for distinct cultivars. A number of studies have demonstrated that rice plants achieve Al tolerance through an unknown mechanism that is independent of root tip Al exclusion. We have analysed expression changes of the rice ASR gene family as a function of Al treatment. The gene ASR5 was differentially regulated in the Al-tolerant rice ssp. Japonica cv. Nipponbare. However, ASR5 expression did not respond to Al exposure in Indica cv. Taim rice roots, which are highly Al sensitive. Transgenic plants carrying RNAi constructs that targeted the ASR genes were obtained, and increased Al susceptibility was observed in T1 plants. Embryogenic calli of transgenic rice carrying an ASR5-green fluorescent protein fusion revealed that ASR5 was localized in both the nucleus and cytoplasm. Using a proteomic approach to compare non-transformed and ASR-RNAi plants, a total of 41 proteins with contrasting expression patterns were identified. We suggest that the ASR5 protein acts as a transcription factor to regulate the expression of different genes that collectively protect rice cells from Al-induced stress responses.	Asr1,Asr2,Asr4,Asr6,ASR5|OsAsr1
Expression of salt-induced 2-Cys peroxiredoxin from Oryza sativa increases stress tolerance and fermentation capacity in genetically engineered yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae	2013	Appl Microbiol Biotechnol	Advanced Bio-resource Research Center, Department of Biology, College of Natural Sciences, Kyungpook National University, #1370 Sankyuk-dong, Buk-gu, Daegu 702-701, Republic of Korea. 92kis@hanmail.net	Peroxiredoxins (Prxs), also termed thioredoxin peroxidases (TPXs), are a family of thiol-specific antioxidant enzymes that are critically involved in cell defense and protect cells from oxidative damage. In this study, a putative chloroplastic 2-Cys thioredoxin peroxidase (OsTPX) was identified by proteome analysis from leaf tissue samples of rice (Oryza sativa) seedlings exposed to 0.1 M NaCl for 3 days. To investigate the relationship between the OsTPX gene and the stress response, OsTPX was cloned into the yeast expression vector p426GPD under the control of the glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GPD1) promoter, and the construct was transformed into Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells. OsTPX expression was confirmed by semi-quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and western blot analyses. OsTPX contained two highly conserved cysteine residues (Cys114 and Cys236) and an active site region (FTFVCPT), and it is structurally very similar to human 2-Cys Prx. Heterologous OsTPX expression increased the ability of the transgenic yeast cells to adapt and recover from reactive oxygen species (ROS)-induced oxidative stresses, such as a reduction of cellular hydroperoxide levels in the presence of hydrogen peroxide and menadione, by improving redox homeostasis. OsTPX expression also conferred enhanced tolerance to tert-butylhydroperoxide, heat shock, and high ethanol concentrations. Furthermore, high OsTPX expression improved the fermentation capacity of the yeast during glucose-based batch fermentation at a high temperature (40 degrees C) and at the general cultivation temperature (30 degrees C). The alcohol yield in OsTPX-expressing transgenic yeast increased by approximately 29 % (0.14 g g(-1)) and 21 % (0.12 g g(-1)) during fermentation at 40 and 30 degrees C, respectively, compared to the wild-type yeast. Accordingly, OsTPX-expressing transgenic yeast showed prolonged cell survival during the environmental stresses produced during fermentation. These results suggest that heterologous OsTPX expression increases acquired tolerance to ROS-induced oxidative stress by improving cellular redox homeostasis and improves fermentation capacity due to improved cell survival during fermentation, especially at a high temperature.	BAS1|OsTPX
A highly efficient rice green tissue protoplast system for transient gene expression and studying light/chloroplast-related processes	2011	Plant Methods	State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, P, R, China. wanghb@mail.sysu.edu.cn.	BACKGROUND: Plant protoplasts, a proven physiological and versatile cell system, are widely used in high-throughput analysis and functional characterization of genes. Green protoplasts have been successfully used in investigations of plant signal transduction pathways related to hormones, metabolites and environmental challenges. In rice, protoplasts are commonly prepared from suspension cultured cells or etiolated seedlings, but only a few studies have explored the use of protoplasts from rice green tissue. RESULTS: Here, we report a simplified method for isolating protoplasts from normally cultivated young rice green tissue without the need for unnecessary chemicals and a vacuum device. Transfections of the generated protoplasts with plasmids of a wide range of sizes (4.5-13 kb) and co-transfections with multiple plasmids achieved impressively high efficiencies and allowed evaluations by 1) protein immunoblotting analysis, 2) subcellular localization assays, and 3) protein-protein interaction analysis by bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC) and firefly luciferase complementation (FLC). Importantly, the rice green tissue protoplasts were photosynthetically active and sensitive to the retrograde plastid signaling inducer norflurazon (NF). Transient expression of the GFP-tagged light-related transcription factor OsGLK1 markedly upregulated transcript levels of the endogeneous photosynthetic genes OsLhcb1, OsLhcp, GADPH and RbcS, which were reduced to some extent by NF treatment in the rice green tissue protoplasts. CONCLUSIONS: We show here a simplified and highly efficient transient gene expression system using photosynthetically active rice green tissue protoplasts and its broad applications in protein immunoblot, localization and protein-protein interaction assays. These rice green tissue protoplasts will be particularly useful in studies of light/chloroplast-related processes.	BAS1|OsTPX,GADPH,CAB2R
The GA octodinucleotide repeat binding factor BBR participates in the transcriptional regulation of the homeobox geneBkn3	2003	The Plant Journal	Max-Planck-Institut fr Zchtungsforschung, Department of Plant Breeding and Yield Physiology, Carl-von-Linn-Weg 10, 50829 Kln, Germany.	In the dominant mutant Hooded (K), the barley gene BKn3 is overexpressed as a result of a duplication of 305 bp in intron IV. When fused to a cauliflower mosaic virus 35S minimal promoter, the 305 bp element activates gene expression in tobacco, as does a 655 bp BKn3 promoter sequence. Both DNA fragments contain a (GA)8 repeat (GA/TC)8. A one-hybrid screen using the 305 bp element as the DNA target led to the cloning of the barley b recombinant (BBR) protein, which binds specifically to the (GA/TC)8 repeat. BBR is nuclear targeted and is a characterized nuclear localization signal (NLS) sequence, a DNA-binding domain extended up to 90 aa at the C-terminus and a putative N-terminal activation domain. The corresponding gene has no introns and is ubiquitously expressed in barley tissues. In co-transfection experiments, BBR activates (GA/TC)8-containing promoters, and its overexpression in tobacco leads to a pronounced leaf shape modification. BBR has properties of a GAGA-binding factor, but the corresponding gene has no sequence homology to Trl and Psq of Drosophila, which encode functionally analogous proteins. In Arabidopsis, (GA/TC)8 repeats occur particularly within 1500 bp upstream of gene start codons included in some homeodomain genes of different classes. The data presented suggest that expression of the barley BKn3 is regulated, at least in part, by the binding of the transcription factor BBR to GA/TC repeats.	BBR
Rice Brittle culm 6 encodes a dominant-negative form of CesA protein that perturbs cellulose synthesis in secondary cell walls	2011	J Exp Bot	Division of Life Science, Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Saitama University, 255 Shimo-okubo, Sakura-ku, Saitama 338-8570, Japan.	The brittle culm (bc) mutants of Gramineae plants having brittle skeletal structures are valuable materials for studying secondary cell walls. In contrast to other recessive bc mutants, rice Bc6 is a semi-dominant bc mutant with easily breakable plant bodies. In this study, the Bc6 gene was cloned by positional cloning. Bc6 encodes a cellulose synthase catalytic subunit, OsCesA9, and has a missense mutation in its highly conserved region. In culms of the Bc6 mutant, the proportion of cellulose was reduced by 38%, while that of hemicellulose was increased by 34%. Introduction of the semi-dominant Bc6 mutant gene into wild-type rice significantly reduced the percentage of cellulose, causing brittle phenotypes. Transmission electron microscopy analysis revealed that Bc6 mutation reduced the cell wall thickness of sclerenchymal cells in culms. In rice expressing a reporter construct, BC6 promoter activity was detected in the culms, nodes, and flowers, and was localized primarily in xylem tissues. This expression pattern was highly similar to that of BC1, which encodes a COBRA-like protein involved in cellulose synthesis in secondary cell walls in rice. These results indicate that BC6 is a secondary cell wall-specific CesA that plays an important role in proper deposition of cellulose in the secondary cell walls.	BC1,Bc6|OsCesA9
BRITTLE CULM1, Which Encodes a COBRA-Like Protein, Affects the Mechanical Properties of Rice Plants	2003	The Plant Cell Online	Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.	Plant mechanical strength is an important agronomic trait. To understand the molecular mechanism that controls the plant mechanical strength of crops, we characterized the classic rice mutant brittle culm1 (bc1) and isolated BC1 using a map-based cloning approach. BC1, which encodes a COBRA-like protein, is expressed mainly in developing sclerenchyma cells and in vascular bundles of rice. In these types of cells, mutations in BC1 cause not only a reduction in cell wall thickness and cellulose content but also an increase in lignin level, suggesting that BC1, a gene that controls the mechanical strength of monocots, plays an important role in the biosynthesis of the cell walls of mechanical tissues.	BC1
The carbohydrate-binding module (CBM)-like sequence is crucial for rice CWA1/BC1 function in proper assembly of secondary cell wall materials	2010	Plant Signal Behav	Graduate School of Bio-Applications and Systems Engineering, Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology, Koganei, Japan	We recently reported that the cwa1 mutation disturbed the deposition and assembly of secondary cell wall materials in the cortical fiber of rice internodes. Genetic analysis revealed that cwa1 is allelic to bc1, which encodes glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored COBRA-like protein with the highest homology to Arabidopsis COBRA-like 4 (COBL4) and maize Brittle Stalk 2 (Bk2). Our results suggested that CWA1/BC1 plays a role in assembling secondary cell wall materials at appropriate sites, enabling synthesis of highly ordered secondary cell wall structure with solid and flexible internodes in rice. The N-terminal amino acid sequence of CWA1/BC1, as well as its orthologs (COBL4, Bk2) and other BC1-like proteins in rice, shows weak similarity to a family II carbohydrate-binding module (CBM2) of several bacterial cellulases. To investigate the importance of the CBM-like sequence of CWA1/BC1 in the assembly of secondary cell wall materials, Trp residues in the CBM-like sequence, which is important for carbohydrate binding, were substituted for Val residues and introduced into the cwa1 mutant. CWA1/BC1 with the mutated sequence did not complement the abnormal secondary cell walls seen in the cwa1 mutant, indicating that the CBM-like sequence is essential for the proper function of CWA1/BC1, including assembly of secondary cell wall materials.	BC1
Isolation of a novel cell wall architecture mutant of rice with defective Arabidopsis COBL4 ortholog BC1 required for regulated deposition of secondary cell wall components	2010	Planta	Graduate School of Bio-Applications and Systems Engineering, Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology, Koganei, Japan. 	The plant secondary cell wall is a highly ordered structure composed of various polysaccharides, phenolic components and proteins. Its coordinated regulation of a number of complex metabolic pathways and assembly has not been resolved. To understand the molecular mechanisms that regulate secondary cell wall synthesis, we isolated a novel rice mutant, cell wall architecture1 (cwa1), that exhibits an irregular thickening pattern in the secondary cell wall of sclerenchyma, as well as culm brittleness and reduced cellulose content in mature internodes. Light and transmission electron microscopy revealed that the cwa1 mutant plant has regions of local aggregation in the secondary cell walls of the cortical fibers in its internodes, showing uneven thickness. Ultraviolet microscopic observation indicated that localization of cell wall phenolic components was perturbed and that these components abundantly deposited at the aggregated cell wall regions in sclerenchyma. Therefore, regulation of deposition and assembly of secondary cell wall materials, i.e. phenolic components, appear to be disturbed by mutation of the cwa1 gene. Genetic analysis showed that cwa1 is allelic to brittle culm1 (bc1), which encodes the glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored COBRA-like protein specifically in plants. BC1 is known as a regulator that controls the culm mechanical strength and cellulose content in the secondary cell walls of sclerenchyma, but the precise function of BC1 has not been resolved. Our results suggest that CWA1/BC1 has an essential role in assembling cell wall constituents at their appropriate sites, thereby enabling synthesis of solid and flexible internodes in rice.	BC1
BC10, a DUF266-containing and Golgi-located type II membrane protein, is required for cell-wall biosynthesis in rice (Oryza sativa L.)	2009	Plant J	State Key Laboratory of Plant Genomics and National Center for Plant Gene Research, Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.	Glycosyltransferases (GTs) are one of the largest enzyme groups required for the synthesis of complex wall polysaccharides and glycoproteins in plants. However, due to the limited number of related mutants that have observable phenotypes, the biological function(s) of most GTs in cell-wall biosynthesis and assembly have remained elusive. We report here the isolation and in-depth characterization of a brittle rice mutant, brittle culm 10 (bc10). bc10 plants show pleiotropic phenotypes, including brittleness of the plant body and retarded growth. The BC10 gene was cloned through a map-based approach, and encodes a Golgi-located type II membrane protein that contains a domain designated as 'domain of unknown function 266' (DUF266) and represents a multiple gene family in rice. BC10 has low sequence similarity with the domain to a core 2 beta-1,6-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (C2GnT), and its in vitro enzymatic activity suggests that it functions as a glycosyltransferase. Monosaccharide analysis of total and fractioned wall residues revealed that bc10 showed impaired cellulose biosynthesis. Immunolocalization and isolation of arabinogalactan proteins (AGPs) in the wild-type and bc10 showed that the level of AGPs in the mutant is significantly affected. BC10 is mainly expressed in the developing sclerenchyma and vascular bundle cells, and its deficiency causes a reduction in the levels of cellulose and AGPs, leading to inferior mechanical properties.	BC10
Brittle Culm 12, a dual-targeting kinesin-4 protein, controls cell-cycle progression and wall properties in rice	2010	Plant J	State Key Laboratory of Plant Genomics, Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.	Kinesins are encoded by a large gene family involved in many basic processes of plant development. However, the number of functionally identified kinesins in rice is very limited. Here, we report the functional characterization of Brittle Culm12 (BC12), a gene encoding a kinesin-4 protein. bc12 mutants display dwarfism resulting from a significant reduction in cell number and brittleness due to an alteration in cellulose microfibril orientation and wall composition. BC12 is expressed mainly in tissues undergoing cell division and secondary wall thickening. In vitro biochemical analyses verified BC12 as an authentic motor protein. This protein was present in both the nucleus and cytoplasm and associated with microtubule arrays during cell division. Mitotic microtubule array comparison, flow cytometric analysis and expression assays of cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) complexes in root-tip cells showed that cell-cycle progression is affected in bc12 mutants. BC12 is very probably regulated by CDKA;3 based on yeast two-hybrid and microarray data. Therefore, BC12 functions as a dual-targeting kinesin protein and is implicated in cell-cycle progression, cellulose microfibril deposition and wall composition in the monocot plant rice.	BC12
Mutation of rice BC12/GDD1, which encodes a kinesin-like protein that binds to a GA biosynthesis gene promoter, leads to dwarfism with impaired cell elongation	2011	Plant Cell	Research Center for Molecular and Developmental Biology, Key Laboratory of Photosynthesis and Environmental Molecular Physiology, Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100093, China.	The kinesins are a family of microtubule-based motor proteins that move directionally along microtubules and are involved in many crucial cellular processes, including cell elongation in plants. Less is known about kinesins directly regulating gene transcription to affect cellular physiological processes. Here, we describe a rice (Oryza sativa) mutant, gibberellin-deficient dwarf1 (gdd1), that has a phenotype of greatly reduced length of root, stems, spikes, and seeds. This reduced length is due to decreased cell elongation and can be rescued by exogenous gibberellic acid (GA(3)) treatment. GDD1 was cloned by a map-based approach, was expressed constitutively, and was found to encode the kinesin-like protein BRITTLE CULM12 (BC12). Microtubule cosedimentation assays revealed that BC12/GDD1 bound to microtubules in an ATP-dependent manner. Whole-genome microarray analysis revealed the expression of ent-kaurene oxidase (KO2), which encodes an enzyme involved in GA biosynthesis, was downregulated in gdd1. Electrophoretic mobility shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed that GDD1 bound to the element ACCAACTTGAA in the KO2 promoter. In addition, GDD1 was shown to have transactivation activity. The level of endogenous GAs was reduced in gdd1, and the reorganization of cortical microtubules was altered. Therefore, BC12/GDD1, a kinesin-like protein with transcription regulation activity, mediates cell elongation by regulating the GA biosynthesis pathway in rice.	BC12,D35|OsKOS3|OsKO2
Brittle culm15 encodes a membrane-associated chitinase-like protein required for cellulose biosynthesis in rice	2012	Plant Physiol	Key Laboratory of Plant Genomics, Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.	Plant chitinases, a class of glycosyl hydrolases, participate in various aspects of normal plant growth and development, including cell wall metabolism and disease resistance. The rice (Oryza sativa) genome encodes 37 putative chitinases and chitinase-like proteins. However, none of them has been characterized at the genetic level. In this study, we report the isolation of a brittle culm mutant, bc15, and the map-based cloning of the BC15/OsCTL1 (for chitinase-like1) gene affected in the mutant. The gene encodes the rice chitinase-like protein BC15/OsCTL1. Mutation of BC15/OsCTL1 causes reduced cellulose content and mechanical strength without obvious alterations in plant growth. Bioinformatic analyses indicated that BC15/OsCTL1 is a class II chitinase-like protein that is devoid of both an amino-terminal cysteine-rich domain and the chitinase activity motif H-E-T-T but possesses an amino-terminal transmembrane domain. Biochemical assays demonstrated that BC15/OsCTL1 is a Golgi-localized type II membrane protein that lacks classical chitinase activity. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and beta-glucuronidase activity analyses indicated that BC15/OsCTL1 is ubiquitously expressed. Investigation of the global expression profile of wild-type and bc15 plants, using Illumina RNA sequencing, further suggested a possible mechanism by which BC15/OsCTL1 mediates cellulose biosynthesis and cell wall remodeling. Our findings provide genetic evidence of a role for plant chitinases in cellulose biosynthesis in rice, which appears to differ from their roles as revealed by analysis of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana).	bc15|OsCTL1
Rice BRITTLE CULM 3 (BC3) encodes a classical dynamin OsDRP2B essential for proper secondary cell wall synthesis	2010	Planta	Division of Plant Sciences, National Institute of Agrobiological Sciences, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.	"Brittle culm" mutants found in Gramineae crops are suitable materials to study the mechanism of secondary cell wall formation. Through positional cloning, we have identified a gene responsible for the brittle culm phenotype in rice, brittle culm 3 (bc3). BC3 encodes a member of the classical dynamin protein family, a family known to function widely in membrane dynamics. The bc3 mutation resulted in reductions of 28-36% in cellulose contents in culms, leaves, and roots, while other cell wall components remained unaffected. Reductions of cell wall thickness and birefringence were observed in both fiber (sclerenchyma) and parenchymal cells, together with blurring of the wall's layered structures. From promoter-GUS analyses, it was suggested that BC3 expression is directly correlated with active secondary cell wall synthesis. These results suggest that BC3 is tightly involved in the synthesis of cellulose and is essential for proper secondary cell wall construction.	BC3|OsDRP2B
The rice dynamin-related protein DRP2B mediates membrane trafficking, and thereby plays a critical role in secondary cell wall cellulose biosynthesis	2010	Plant J	State Key Laboratory of Plant Genomics and National Center for Plant Gene Research, Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.	Membrane trafficking between the plasma membrane (PM) and intracellular compartments is an important process that regulates the deposition and metabolism of cell wall polysaccharides. Dynamin-related proteins (DRPs), which function in membrane tubulation and vesiculation are closely associated with cell wall biogenesis. However, the molecular mechanisms by which DRPs participate in cell wall formation are poorly understood. Here, we report the functional characterization of Brittle Culm3 (BC3), a gene encoding OsDRP2B. Consistent with the expression of BC3 in mechanical tissues, the bc3 mutation reduces mechanical strength, which results from decreased cellulose content and altered secondary wall structure. OsDRP2B, one of three members of the DRP2 subfamily in rice (Oryza sativa L.), was identified as an authentic membrane-associated dynamin via in vitro biochemical analyses. Subcellular localization of fluorescence-tagged OsDRP2B and several compartment markers in protoplast cells showed that this protein not only lies at the PM and the clathrin-mediated vesicles, but also is targeted to the trans-Golgi network (TGN). An FM4-64 uptake assay in transgenic plants that express green fluorescent protein-tagged OsDRP2B verified its involvement in an endocytic pathway. BC3 mutation and overexpression altered the abundance of cellulose synthase catalytic subunit 4 (OsCESA4) in the PM and in the endomembrane systems. All of these findings lead us to conclude that OsDRP2B participates in the endocytic pathway, probably as well as in post-Golgi membrane trafficking. Mutation of OsDRP2B disturbs the membrane trafficking that is essential for normal cellulose biosynthesis of the secondary cell wall, thereby leading to inferior mechanical properties in rice plants.	BC3|OsDRP2B,OsCesA4|Bc7|bc11
Map-based cloning of a novel rice cytochrome P450 gene CYP81A6 that confers resistance to two different classes of herbicides	2006	Plant Mol Biol	College of Agriculture and Biotechnology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310029, Zhejiang, China.	Development of hybrid rice has greatly contributed to increased yields during the past three decades. Two bentazon-lethal mutants 8077S and Norin8m are being utilized in developing new hybrid rice systems. When the male sterile lines are developed in such a mutant background, the problem of F1 seed contamination by self-seeds from the sterile lines can be solved by spraying bentazon at seedling stage. We first determined the sensitivity of the mutant plants to bentazon. Both mutants showed symptoms to bentazon starting from 100 mg/l, which was about 60-fold, lower than the sensitivity threshold of their wild-type controls. In addition, both mutants were sensitive to sulfonylurea-type herbicides. The locus for the mutant phenotype is bel for 8077S and bsl for Norin8m. Tests showed that the two loci are allelic to each other. The two genes were cloned by map-based cloning. Interestingly, both mutant alleles had a single-base deletion, which was confirmed by PCR-RFLP. The two loci are renamed bel ( a ) (for bel) and bel ( b ) (for bsl). The wild-type Bel gene encodes a novel cytochrome P450 monooxgenase, named CYP81A6. Analysis of the mutant protein sequence also revealed the reason for bel ( a ) being slightly tolerant than bel ( b ). Introduction of the wild-type Bel gene rescued the bentazon- and sulfonylurea-sensitive phenotype of bel ( a ) mutant. On the other hand, expression of antisense Bel in W6154S induced a mutant phenotype. Based on these results we conclude that the novel cytochrome P450 monooxygenase CYP81A6 encoded by Bel confers resistance to two different classes of herbicides.	bel|CYP81A6|bsl
A novel rice cytochrome P450 gene, CYP72A31, confers tolerance to acetolactate synthase-inhibiting herbicides in rice and Arabidopsis	2014	Plant Physiol	Agrogenomics Research Center, National Institute of Agrobiological Sciences	Target-site and non-target-site herbicide tolerance are caused by the prevention of herbicide binding to the target enzyme and the reduction to a non-lethal dose of herbicide reaching the target enzyme, respectively. There is little information on the molecular mechanisms involved in non-target-site herbicide tolerance, although it poses the greater threat in the evolution of herbicide-resistant weeds and could potentially be useful for the production of herbicide-tolerant crops because it is often involved in tolerance to multi-herbicides. Bispyribac sodium (BS) is a herbicide that inhibits the activity of acetolactate synthase (ALS). Rice of the indica variety show BS tolerance while japonica rice varieties are BS sensitive. Map-based cloning and complementation tests revealed that a novel cytochrome P450 monooxygenase, CYP72A31, is involved in BS tolerance. Interestingly, BS tolerance was correlated with CYP72A31 mRNA levels in transgenic plants of rice and Arabidopsis. Moreover, Arabidopsis overexpressing CYP72A31 showed tolerance to bensulfuron-methyl (BSM), which belongs to a different class of ALS-inhibiting herbicides, suggesting that CYP72A31 can metabolize BS and BSM to a compound with reduced phytotoxicity. On the other hand, we showed that the cytochrome P450 monooxygenase CYP81A6, which has been reported to confer BSM tolerance, is barely involved, if at all, in BS tolerance, suggesting that the CYP72A31 enzyme has different herbicide specificities compared to CYP81A6. Thus, the CYP72A31 gene is a potentially useful genetic resource in the field of weed control, herbicide development, and molecular breeding in broad range of crop species.	bel|CYP81A6|bsl,CYP72A31
Suppression of a NAC-like transcription factor gene improves boron-toxicity tolerance in rice	2011	Plant Physiol	Laboratory of Plant Nutrition, Division of Applied Life Sciences, Graduate School of Agriculture, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan.	We identified a gene responsible for tolerance to boron (B) toxicity in rice (Oryza sativa), named BORON EXCESS TOLERANT1. Using recombinant inbred lines derived from the B-toxicity-sensitive indica-ecotype cultivar IR36 and the tolerant japonica-ecotype cultivar Nekken 1, the region responsible for tolerance to B toxicity was narrowed to 49 kb on chromosome 4. Eight genes are annotated in this region. The DNA sequence in this region was compared between the B-toxicity-sensitive japonica cultivar Wataribune and the B-toxicity-tolerant japonica cultivar Nipponbare by eco-TILLING analysis and revealed a one-base insertion mutation in the open reading frame sequence of the gene Os04g0477300. The gene encodes a NAC (NAM, ATAF, and CUC)-like transcription factor and the function of the transcript is abolished in B-toxicity-tolerant cultivars. Transgenic plants in which the expression of Os04g0477300 is abolished by RNA interference gain tolerance to B toxicity.	BET1
Genetic control of a transition from black to straw-white seed hull in rice domestication	2011	Plant Physiol	National Center for Gene Research and Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200233, China.	The genetic mechanism involved in a transition from the black-colored seed hull of the ancestral wild rice (Oryza rufipogon and Oryza nivara) to the straw-white seed hull of cultivated rice (Oryza sativa) during grain ripening remains unknown. We report that the black hull of O. rufipogon was controlled by the Black hull4 (Bh4) gene, which was fine-mapped to an 8.8-kb region on rice chromosome 4 using a cross between O. rufipogon W1943 (black hull) and O. sativa indica cv Guangluai 4 (straw-white hull). Bh4 encodes an amino acid transporter. A 22-bp deletion within exon 3 of the bh4 variant disrupted the Bh4 function, leading to the straw-white hull in cultivated rice. Transgenic study indicated that Bh4 could restore the black pigment on hulls in cv Guangluai 4 and Kasalath. Bh4 sequence alignment of all taxa with the outgroup Oryza barthii showed that the wild rice maintained comparable levels of nucleotide diversity that were about 70 times higher than those in the cultivated rice. The results from the maximum likelihood Hudson-Kreitman-Aguade test suggested that the significant reduction in nucleotide diversity in rice cultivars could be caused by artificial selection. We propose that the straw-white hull was selected as an important visual phenotype of nonshattered grains during rice domestication.	Bh4
The role of Bh4 in parallel evolution of hull colour in domesticated and weedy rice	2013	J Evol Biol	Department of Biology, Washington University, St. Louis, MO, USA.	The two independent domestication events in the genus Oryza that led to African and Asian rice offer an extremely useful system for studying the genetic basis of parallel evolution. This system is also characterized by parallel de-domestication events, with two genetically distinct weedy rice biotypes in the US derived from the Asian domesticate. One important trait that has been altered by rice domestication and de-domestication is hull colour. The wild progenitors of the two cultivated rice species have predominantly black-coloured hulls, as does one of the two U.S. weed biotypes; both cultivated species and one of the US weedy biotypes are characterized by straw-coloured hulls. Using Black hull 4 (Bh4) as a hull colour candidate gene, we examined DNA sequence variation at this locus to study the parallel evolution of hull colour variation in the domesticated and weedy rice system. We find that independent Bh4-coding mutations have arisen in African and Asian rice that are correlated with the straw hull phenotype, suggesting that the same gene is responsible for parallel trait evolution. For the U.S. weeds, Bh4 haplotype sequences support current hypotheses on the phylogenetic relationship between the two biotypes and domesticated Asian rice; straw hull weeds are most similar to indica crops, and black hull weeds are most similar to aus crops. Tests for selection indicate that Asian crops and straw hull weeds deviate from neutrality at this gene, suggesting possible selection on Bh4 during both rice domestication and de-domestication.	Bh4